The sea murmured without end. The sound of the large breakers rose and fell. So did the wind in the bare branches. It rose and fell, becoming as quiet as me, listening throughout the night. But the wind never left, it remained with me. I could tell by the smell of the wet shingle and the subtle trembling of the last leaf on the plane tree. I had noticed that stubborn grey leaf the day before, but now, at night, it seemed a tiny living creature, my one friend, keeping vigil beside me. Now and then gunshots echoed in the dark from somewhere off in the city. After each shot, dogs barked for a long time. Once a faint light flickered far out at sea and then vanished.
It forced me to look at them longer and more carefully than we normally do, and I discovered in them many hitherto unnoticed details. The porous yellow stone was encrusted with tiny seashells and on the gorse a few flowers remained, sitting on straight, stiff branches like so many drenched, wrinkled golden butterflies waiting patiently for the sun. But it seldom showed through the fog and then only as a smudgy white blur that provided neither warmth nor shade. Under the one old plane tree, lemon-yellow splotches on its trunk, lay piles of leaves that looked as though cut from dull green velvet. Columns of ants scurried along the iron gate, carrying the last load of winter supplies to their underground granaries, and beneath the anchor lived a timid little toad.
That night someone on the other side of the river began yelling and waving a lantern. I went to the riverbank with Uncle Ilko. The river was raging. The water raced over the causeway in an icy cascade. It was late and dark, not a single star shone over our heads. The wind blew the raw freshness of the flood and thawing earth into our faces. And the whole time someone on the far bank kept shouting and waving a lantern, but not a word could be made out over the noise of the river.
Once we got the coffin out onto the steps, I caught sight on the far side of the river of an old carriage with some untethered horses and a small woman in black – Mama. She was standing motionless on the riverbank. She saw that we were carrying Father from the house. She dropped to her knees and her head fell to the ground.
‘No,’ Grandfather would answer. ‘That’s right, never again. Ostap began to lose his sight. He thought about going all the way to St Petersburg to see this woman before going blind. And he did walk all the way to the tsar’s capital, only to learn that she had died – possibly because she couldn’t bear their separation. Ostap found her tombstone of white marble in a graveyard there. He looked and then his heart broke – on the marble lay his iron rose. The woman had instructed that it be placed on her grave. Ostap took up the lyre and most likely died out on the high road or perhaps under his cart in some market town. Amen!’
Spread out along a slope on the far side of the river was the forest preserve of Countess Branitskaya. The green forest was so thick the sun could not penetrate it. It was rare when a ray of sunlight managed to break through the trees to reveal the amazing forest depths. Little birds darted into the beam like twinkling dust motes. They chirped as they chased each other and then dived into the leaves as if into green water.
I gathered a pail of water from the pond, threw in a handful of weeds, and waited. Red floats rested motionless on the surface of the water. Then one of them would begin to tilt, creating slight ripples, before either diving to the bottom or shooting to one side. Father hooked a fish, the line tightened, the wooden rod bowed into an arc and then a thrashing, splashing row erupted in the haze over the pond. The ripples rocked the lilies and sent the pond skaters scuttling in all directions, and then, finally, out of the mysterious depths there appeared a quivering streak of gold. It was impossible to know just what it was until Father landed the heavy carp on the trampled grass. It lay on its side gasping for air and moving its fins. The carp’s scales smelled of a wondrous, underwater realm.
Yasha counted the seconds to himself. We knew it took seven minutes to walk from Sturdzovsky Lane to Dr Landesman’s. We always felt safe once we were back at the sanatorium, behind its high wall and iron gates, especially if we made sure not to light the oil lamps. As we were passing the doorway, Yasha stumbled. Whenever we talked about this incident later, Yasha always insisted that the more you concentrate on doing something perfectly, the more likely you are to make some foolish mistake. As for me, I was convinced it was all due to his absurd way of walking. But I never told him this to spare his feelings.
We crept stealthily down the lane. Before we set out, I had told Yasha that we should make our way down the side of the street with the doorway, stop before we reached it, and then quickly and quietly dart past it. I had worked it out mathematically. If anyone was hiding in the doorway, they might well not see us coming. If we went down the other side of the lane, however, they could see us from a good way off. According to my calculation, if we walked on the other side, we would be in sight of the enemy five times longer. Thus, the danger to us would be five times greater.
The hot sun beating against the white walls woke me in the morning. Red and yellow hollyhocks swayed outside the open window. A nasturtium peeped inside the room; a furry bee had crawled into the flower and become stuck. I froze and watched as it angrily struggled to back its way out and fly off. Soft, bright waves of light reflected from the river rippled endlessly across the ceiling. The river rushed noisily nearby
