The most significant event of winter 1993, as far as I was concerned, was Dad’s return—the week before Mom’s marriage. One afternoon in December, he showed up at my school and asked for me. I ran all the way to the gate. He was smoking some distance away on the other side of the metal fence, in a long black coat whose upturned collar hid half his face. Even before I could get a proper look at him, I had a feeling he wasn’t doing well. I felt a twinge in my heart, and tears came to my eyes.
I’d never imagined Mom would want to marry again. Perhaps subconsciously, I wanted her to keep suffering from Dad’s departure, just like I was. Besides, I felt she lacked the ability to find happiness—but it turned out happiness was still able to find her. She was attractive enough that she didn’t need to make any special effort, just standing there sufficed.
That winter felt particularly long. Halfway through April, the first flowers hadn’t yet bloomed. You were feeling low because of your parents’ divorce. We’d stopped playing games. In the evenings, we sat on the wall around Dead Man’s Tower. There were now more dismembered arms among the body parts in the courtyard. We reached for them with a grappling hook, pulling them into the shape of a thousand-handed Goddess of Mercy.
Dad didn’t actually know anything about business—he was just throwing his lot in with a cousin he didn’t even know that well. Grandma’s little sister had moved to Beijing early on, got married and had kids there. This cousin of Dad’s was her eldest son, and he didn’t fit into our clan at all.
Earlier on, you said everyone has a moment when their fate is activated, and after that they’re being led around by a rope. For me, that probably happened when I turned eight. Dad left Jinan in the fall and traveled alone to Beijing. From then on, I had no home.
I hadn’t planned to show up—I didn’t think we had any need to meet again. I sat on the couch and smoked cigarette after cigarette as it got dark. Then someone tapped on the door: the water delivery boy. He wore a filthy gray wool hat and looked harried. “I had to make a delivery on the west side,” he said.
It was a difficult conversation. Every time we fell into silence, I felt something squeezing at my heart, and I wanted to end this encounter as quickly as possible. You seemed to sense this, and searched for something else to talk about. The tea cooled, the fog dissipated. You stood to leave. I’d only just closed the door and sighed in relief when the bell rang again. You said I should come to the white mansion later and walked away before I could respond.
I went to the kitchen and turned off the stove. Half the water had boiled away, filling the room with fog. You sat and watched anxiously as I made tea. “Are you still living with your grandma and aunt?” you asked. I told you Granny was dead, but yes, I was still with Auntie. “And she never married?” “No.”
Your breath came white from your mouth. The wind had tangled your curly hair, and your knees were trembling under your coat. All these things told me you were actually there, and this wasn’t just a continuation of the dream. I hadn’t seen you in eighteen years, no wonder I couldn’t recognize you. You weren’t wearing makeup, and your pale face looked a little swollen, but it was clear you’d grown into a beauty like we’d all known you would—though you had the numb expression of someone who’s been in the big city too long. You asked if you looked how I’d imagined. I smiled and admitted I’d never imagined you grown up. As far as I was concerned, you and everything to do with you had been placed into a sealed folder. Maybe this is hurtful to hear, but I had truly never hoped to meet you again.
I opened my eyes. You were in the doorway. I didn’t know how long you’d been there. Had you seen me laughing from the dream, then my sadness when I woke, when I was at my most vulnerable? You said my name in a soft, raspy voice, as if you hadn’t spoken for a long time. The sky was dark—about to snow. The boiling water rumbled. I looked carefully but didn’t know who you were, yet I felt this stranger standing in the gloom had a deep connection to my life. The thought chilled my spine. I frantically flicked through the Rolodex of my mind. You told me you were Li Jiaqi.
