She looks at a family of girls, a woman with a child at her breast just climbing down awkwardly from her cart, the driver chasing her off because he has to take the cart back right away to pick up others on the outskirts of town.
The bundle she had on her back falls down, and a few faded rags and a single string of beads, small and dimmed, tumble out of it onto the ground.
The woman gathers them back up in embarrassment, as if she had suddenly bared her most inaccessible secrets to the eyes of the world.
As Deymowa passes her, a little boy suddenly runs up—he looks like he might be six or seven—and looking at her with smiling eyes, very pleased with himself, he says, "Praised be our Lord Jesus!"
She responds automatically, but solemnly, too: "Forever and ever, amen."
And her hand flies up to her heart, and her eyes fill with tears.
She squats down beside the boy, grabs him by the wrists, and he looks her straight in the eye, still smiling, that little rascal.
Suddenly, without warning, the first buildings appear in front of them.
Evidently the fog changes all perception of distance, as even Kaśka seems confused.
She lurches, yanking the drawbar, and were it not for Roshko's firm hand and whip, she would have overturned the britchka.
In front of them is a blacksmith's; maybe
Kaśka got spooked by the sparks spewing from that furnace, or else by the anxiety of the horses waiting their turn to be shod ...
In every place there is the cloying smell of malt that gets into all that is up for sale and gluts a person just as bread can.
On the outskirts of Rohatyn, in Babińce, are several small breweries that give the whole region this satiating scent.
Many stalls here sell beer, and the better shops also keep vodka, and mead—mostly trójniak.
The Jewish merchant Wachshul, meanwhile, sells wine, real Hungarian and Rhineland wine, as well as some sourer stuff they bring in from Wallachia.
Of the Wołowski family there is the most to say, for it grew until it attained gargantuan proportions.
Nearly all its branches became ennobled, some under the Bawół coat of arms, others under Na Kaskach.
A fabulous career was made by Franciszek, son of Isaac Wołowski, the boy whom Father Chmielowski had once called Jeremiah.
Franciszek, born in 1786 in Brünn and raised in Offenbach, became one of the best lawyers and scholars of law of his era.
Interestingly, when a proposal came before the Sejm to grant Polish citizenship to Jews, Franciszek, as a member of parliament, vehemently argued that it was not yet time to take such a step.
First the Polish nation had to win its independence; only then they would be able to turn to such social reforms.
All the Offenbach neophytes were buried in the city cemetery, though some years later this cemetery began to interfere with plans to expand the town, and it was ultimately liquidated in 1866.
The bones of those buried there were carefully collected and respectfully reburied elsewhere.
Jacob Frank's skull was removed from his grave, and, thoughtfully recorded as "a skull belonging to a Jewish patriarch," it passed into the hands of the historian of the city of Offenbach.
Many years later, under unknown circumstances, it made its way to Berlin, where it underwent detailed measurement and research and was labeled a prime example of Jewish racial inferiority.
After the Second World War, it vanished without a trace—either it was destroyed in the turmoil and chaos of war, crumbling to dust, or else it is still lying around somewhere in the underground storage facility of some museum.
After Jacob's death, I entered into a period of peace.
My main occupation became studying Merkavah, which my conversations with Yeruhim Dembowski also managed to cover, as we lived in the one room, which meant we got closer to each other.
To him, to Yeruhim, I also confessed about Hayah Shorr—that she was the one woman I was ever able to love, and that I had loved her from that beautiful moment when I was given her for one night, back when I had come with news of Jacob to Rohatyn.
But above all, of course, it was Jacob I had loved.
They had been in Ivanie since April.
Were it not for those good Ivanie people, they probably would have starved to death.
Ivanie saved their lives and health, Beyla feels better now, and isn't coughing quite as much.
Srol believes that once they have been baptized, they will be as well off as the Christians.
They will receive a piece of land, Beyla will have vegetables in her garden, and he, Srol, will weave carpets, because he knows how to do that and is good at it.
In their old age, once they have married off their daughters, the girls will take them in.
That is his whole dream.
"Kaśka won't go, good sir," Roshko grumbles when the carriage comes to a stop.
He gets out of his seat and vigorously crosses himself—once, twice, and then again.
He leans forward and peers into the fog as he would into water.
His shirt pokes out from underneath his faded red Sunday doublet.
"I don't know where to go," he says.
"What do you mean, you don't know?
We're on the Rohatyn road now," the priest says in astonishment.
And yet!
He gets out of the britchka to join his servant.
Helplessly they circle the carriage, straining their eyes into the pale gray.
For a moment they think they see something, but it's only that their eyes, unable to latch on to anything, have begun to play tricks on them.
But how can they not know where to go?
It's like getting lost in one's own pocket.
"Quiet!" the priest says suddenly, and raises his finger, straining to hear.
And indeed, from somewhere off to the left, through the billows of fog, the faint murmur of water reaches their ears.
"Let's follow that sound," the priest says with determination.
"That's water flowing."
Soon Father Chmielowski relaxes back inside his carriage, stretching his legs out before him, allowing his eyes to drift within this mass of fog.
Right away he slips into his musings—for man thinks best in motion.
Slowly, reluctantly, the mechanism of his mind awakens, wheels and pinions starting up, the whole getting going just like the clock that stands in the vestibule of the presbytery, which he purchased in Lwów for an exorbitant sum.
It'll be just about to chime.
Did not the world emerge from such a fog? he starts to wonder.
After all, the Jewish historian Josephus maintains the world was created in the autumn, at the autumn equinox.
A reasonable notion, since of course there were fruits in paradise; given the apple hanging from the tree, it must indeed have been autumn ...
There is a logic to it.
But right away another thought occurs to him:
What kind of reasoning is this?
Could not Almighty God create such paltry fruits at any time of year?
When they come to the main road leading to Rohatyn, they join the stream of persons on foot and horseback and in every variety of vehicle who appear out of the fog like Christmas figurines sculpted from bread.
It is Wednesday, market day in Rohatyn, and the peasants' carts are loaded with grain sacks, cages with poultry fowl—all sorts of agricultural bounty.
As the carts roll slowly by, merchants skip between them, carrying every imaginable commodity—their stalls, cleverly collapsed, can be thrown over their shoulders like carrying poles; then, in a flash, unfolded, they are tables strewn with bright materials or wooden toys, eggs bought up from the villages for a quarter of what they cost here, now.
Peasants lead goats and cows to be sold; the animals, frightened by the tumult, stop among the puddles and refuse to budge.
Now a wagon flies by them, its cover a tarpaulin riddled with holes; it carries a load of the exuberant Jews who converge upon the Rohatyn market from all over.
Next a very ornate carriage wedges its way through, though in the fog and the crowd it has trouble preserving its dignity—its vibrant little lacquered doors are caked with mud, and the cerulean-cloaked coachman's countenance is wan, as he must not have been expecting such a commotion and is now desperately seeking any opportunity to get off this terrible road.
