When I was younger, after the stories, I used to hold her wrist, put my thumb on her pulse, and imagine the whole world doing everything to Selma's heartbeat.
She put a slice of cheese on the bread, folded it up and put it in my lunch box.
Selma was still standing in front of the kitchen bench.
Perch two.
The train ride lasted fifteen minutes, with no intermediate stops.
This morning, a few hours after Selma's dream, the people in the village were moving as if black ice had formed on all paths, not only outside but also in the houses, black ice in the kitchens and living rooms.
All day long they suspected their lives and, if possible, everyone else's.
Perch one.
Coffee pots and shoelaces, for example, or returnable bottles and Christmas trees.
They looked up to rule out falling tiles, branches, or heavy lampshades.
In first grade, I told Martin what I saw on the drive, and Martin tried to memorize it all.
"Do you know when exactly you dreamed that?"
She looked at the dog for a long time.
She spread butter on a slice of bread and because she was still flapping around, she nudged the cheese off the sideboard with her wrist.
Then she looked at my father like he was a gift shop.
Our mind works like this.
I had always reliably fallen asleep over it, but now, at the age of ten, Selma thought I was too old for that.
They moved as if their own bodies were completely foreign to them, as if all their joints were inflamed and the objects they were handling were also highly flammable.
The optometrist was now slowing down.
I imagined the optometrist grinding lenses, Martin lifting a weight, Elsbeth trimming her hedge, the retailer stocking juice bags, my mother stacking fir branches, my father stamping prescriptions, all doing it right in time with Selma's heartbeat.
That was true.
"Of course," Farmer Häubel would say, "do come in," and death would follow.
"Around three o'clock," said Selma.
Three o'clock.
He imagined death knocking cautiously, opening the door just a crack and asking "May I?", which Farmer Häubel would of course answer in the affirmative.
Within a very short time, he can ensure that the most absurd things belong together.
They weren't startled when the owl cried at night, when a horse sweated profusely in the stable, when a dog howled at night with its head down.
"We probably shouldn't take this so seriously," Selma said, but she said it like a TV detective who doesn't take an anonymous letter too seriously.
Selma stopped now and looked down at the pack of cheese as if it were something precious that had shattered into a thousand pieces.
They avoided all animals because they believed it could break out of them faster than out of people.
They kept looking behind them to see if there was someone lunging at them with a lust for murder, someone who had lost their minds and therefore had nothing significant to lose, and they quickly looked ahead again because someone without their minds would end up attacking head-on could.
Except for Selma's sister-in-law Elsbeth, most of the people in the village were not superstitious.
He was sure that death would not snatch his life away, but would take it gently from his hands.
The way to Selma's house, which actually took ten minutes, suddenly felt like a day's journey, a day's journey with a lot of luggage.
That worked so well that in the second year of school I didn't list anything anymore and Martin, with his back to the window and closed eyes, was able to recite almost everything I was seeing through the fogged-up train window: "Wire factory," he said, at exactly that moment , as we drove past the wire factory.
"What would you like for school lunch today?" she whistled.
They hung out laundry between Christmas and New Year's, which Elsbeth warned is, to superstition, tantamount to suicide or an accessory to murder.
Piece of forest.
Farmer Häubel firmly believed that death would be polite, just as Farmer Häubel himself had been all his life.
He would apologize in advance for the coldness of his hands, which Farmer Häubel knew he wouldn't mind at all, and then put a hand over Farmer Häubel's eyes.
"Little Mouse," she whistled afterwards, and flutes and little mice were now really alarming.
The people in the village were worried, you could see it in them, even if they mostly tried not to show it.
His body was small, but his paws were as big as bear paws, and we all knew what that meant.
He was absolutely right about that, and unfortunately he said more than he should have answered the voices.
"That was cowardice," said the optician, shifting the leather bag to his other hip because the bumping of the bag and the bumping of the voices were starting to hurt.
When I slept downstairs with Selma, she would tell me stories with happy endings on the edge of the bed.
