They flopped, blasting their old-time music.
"Is that a Persian rug?"
"Then who is your mother?
Later the talk grew louder.
We heard them from behind the cracked panes of the dilapidated greenhouse or on the cool black water of the lake, where we floated in our underwear at midnight.
Move in a natural manner toward this figment of my imagination, making a purposeful face.
"Admit it, that was your mother," said a kid named Rafe to a kid named Sukey, when the parents had filed out.
"So fuck you."
We put the dogs in a play and invited the parents, since there was no one else to be an audience.
We had to hide the running, though, in case our haste betrayed us, so truer to say we slipped out quietly.
Apparently, laughing.
And fade away.
From the wrap­around porch, with its bamboo torches and hanging ferns and porch swings, moth-eaten armchairs and blue-light bug zappers, the barks of laughter carried.
There were merits and demerits.
We had a system of accounting, a chart on a wall.
(A blaring klaxon.
We'd paddle across the lake, over a marsh, down a stream, and come to the river's mouth.
A merit was for an outrage success­fully committed, a demerit for an act that should bring on humiliation.
We liked to have an impact.
We watched her apply it, unaware.
"Oh, poor old thing, she has a nervous bladder!" exclaimed someone's chubby mother.
As the evenings wore on, some parents got it into their heads to dance.
Freed of our influence, some of them emitted sudden, harsh barks.
But the pets were poorly trained and failed to take direction.
Juicy got merits for drooling into cocktails undetected, while Low got demerits for kissing up to a father.
The soldiers were cowards.
That was satisfying.
"Beat on the brat, beat on the brat, beat on the brat with a baseball bat, oh yeah."
It went hoh-onk.)
The mother was speaking from the breakfast room, out of my field of view.
THE GREAT HOUSE had been built by robber barons in the nineteenth century, a palatial retreat for the green months.
Where the water met the sky.
I liked that room a lot, with its long, oaken table and glass walls on three sides.
We'd run along the beach on a salt breeze, leaving our boats on the sand.
It was a white-faced dog, so the makeup showed up well.
We heard them from the treehouses and tennis courts and from the field of beehives a slow neighbor woman tended in the daytime, muttering under the veil of her beekeeping hat.
"Neither," said Sukey.
But he'd been spotted asking a guy with male-pattern baldness for wardrobe advice.
Even the smallest canoe could take us down to the ocean.
Deserters, basically.
Probably not his own—Low's parentage was a well-kept secret.
Go through the door.
We canceled the performance.
One dog got makeup applied to its face, lipstick and blue eye shadow.
They ran away when we issued the battle cry.
Sad spectacle.
You could see the bright sparkle of the lake through the glass walls, and sunlight shifted through the moving branches of an ancient willow that shaded the house.
There were two soldiers and a fancy lady we'd dressed in a frilly padded bra.
A flash of life would move their lumpen bodies.
When we were done, the lipstick went back into some mother's Fendi handbag.
The lady urinated.
When one of my parents appeared, my technique was: pretend to catch sight of someone in the next room.
No one would cop to it, of course.
"No way," said Sukey firmly, and shook her head.
