When my sister was being scolded by my mother for normal things, I approached her and asked her why she was angry.
I think that the small habits and gestures of the two of them when they met before may have already flowed out somewhere.
Convenience stores are full of sounds.
Everything mixes together and becomes the "convenience store sound" that touches my eardrums all the time.
I try to remember if it was like that before, but my memory is vague.
"Should I get more?"
I quickly move around the store, slide my body into the cashier counter, and stand inside to wait so as not to keep the customer waiting.
I thought I was born now.
I quickly put the canned coffee, cigarettes, and American dog into an S size bag.
From that gesture, I immediately decided that the payment was made with electronic money.
Then, for the first time, I could become a part of the world.
Look, everyone is crying.
Miho is now married and has bought a second-hand detached house in her hometown, where her friends often gather.
While touching the screen, the man's gaze suddenly shifted to the showcase lined with fast food, and I stopped moving my finger.
Sure enough, there was a man approaching the register with a can of coffee in one hand and the other in his pocket.
I was certainly born on this day as a normal part of the world.
In response to the faint sound of coins, I turn around and look at the cash register.
Miho and Satsuki have a similar facial expression and way of speaking, probably because they meet frequently in their hometowns.
Many people who crunch coins in their palms or pockets are trying to quickly buy cigarettes or newspapers and go home, so they are sensitive to the sound of money.
After the sermon ended because I asked my mother a question, my sister always said "thank you" to me, probably because she thought she was being protected.
In the meantime, the man who was ringing the coins in his pocket suddenly put his hand in his breast pocket.
The way they eat sweets is particularly similar, and both of them are carrying cookies to their mouths while breaking them into small pieces with their manicured hands.
For the two weeks leading up to the opening, we practiced in duo, working with employees, and facing imaginary customers.
"Please touch to confirm your age."
It's sad that your friend died.
