Father hooked a fish, the line tightened, the wooden rod bowed into an arc and then a thrashing, splashing row erupted in the haze over the pond.
Red and yellow hollyhocks swayed outside the open window.
But it seldom showed through the fog and then only as a smudgy white blur that provided neither warmth nor shade.
They chirped as they chased each other and then dived into the leaves as if into green water.
Little birds darted into the beam like twinkling dust motes.
'No,' Grandfather would answer.
It lay on its side gasping for air and moving its fins.
According to my calculation, if we walked on the other side, we would be in sight of the enemy five times longer.
Whenever we talked about this incident later, Yasha always insisted that the more you concentrate on doing something perfectly, the more likely you are to make some foolish mistake.
It was late and dark, not a single star shone over our heads.
The river was raging.
Once a faint light flickered far out at sea and then vanished.
And he did walk all the way to the tsar's capital, only to learn that she had died possibly because she couldn't bear their separation.
She dropped to her knees and her head fell to the ground.
Soft, bright waves of light reflected from the river rippled endlessly across the ceiling.
If anyone was hiding in the doorway, they might well not see us coming.
It was rare when a ray of sunlight managed to break through the trees to reveal the amazing forest depths.
I went to the riverbank with Uncle Ilko.
It forced me to look at them longer and more carefully than we normally do, and I discovered in them many hitherto unnoticed details.
She saw that we were carrying Father from the house.
The green forest was so thick the sun could not penetrate it.
Yasha counted the seconds to himself.
That night someone on the other side of the river began yelling and waving a lantern.
Now and then gunshots echoed in the dark from somewhere off in the city.
I gathered a pail of water from the pond, threw in a handful of weeds, and waited.
And the whole time someone on the far bank kept shouting and waving a lantern, but not a word could be made out over the noise of the river.
Under the one old plane tree, lemon-yellow splotches on its trunk, lay piles of leaves that looked as though cut from dull green velvet.
If we went down the other side of the lane, however, they could see us from a good way off.
I had worked it out mathematically.
It was impossible to know just what it was until Father landed the heavy carp on the trampled grass.
Red floats rested motionless on the surface of the water.
As we were passing the doorway, Yasha stumbled.
We knew it took seven minutes to walk from Sturdzovsky Lane to Dr Landesman's.
Amen!'
We crept stealthily down the lane.
I froze and watched as it angrily struggled to back its way out and fly off.
She was standing motionless on the riverbank.
Before we set out, I had told Yasha that we should make our way down the side of the street with the doorway, stop before we reached it, and then quickly and quietly dart past it.
The sound of the large breakers rose and fell.
Columns of ants scurried along the iron gate, carrying the last load of winter supplies to their underground granaries, and beneath the anchor lived a timid little toad.
The sea murmured without end.
I could tell by the smell of the wet shingle and the subtle trembling of the last leaf on the plane tree.
But the wind never left, it remained with me.
As for me, I was convinced it was all due to his absurd way of walking.
He thought about going all the way to St Petersburg to see this woman before going blind.
Spread out along a slope on the far side of the river was the forest preserve of Countess Branitskaya.
But I never told him this to spare his feelings.
Thus, the danger to us would be five times greater.
The wind blew the raw freshness of the flood and thawing earth into our faces.
Once we got the coffin out onto the steps, I caught sight on the far side of the river of an old carriage with some untethered horses and a small woman in black Mama.
The river rushed noisily nearby
The hot sun beating against the white walls woke me in the morning.
After each shot, dogs barked for a long time.
I had noticed that stubborn grey leaf the day before, but now, at night, it seemed a tiny living creature, my one friend, keeping vigil beside me.
The water raced over the causeway in an icy cascade.
The woman had instructed that it be placed on her grave.
The carp's scales smelled of a wondrous, underwater realm.
Ostap began to lose his sight.
'That's right, never again.
Then one of them would begin to tilt, creating slight ripples, before either diving to the bottom or shooting to one side.
The ripples rocked the lilies and sent the pond skaters scuttling in all directions, and then, finally, out of the mysterious depths there appeared a quivering streak of gold.
