Father hooked, the line was stretched, the walnut rod was bent into an arc, and gurgling, splashing, fussing began in the fog over the pond.
Red and yellow mallow nuns swayed outside the open window.
But it very rarely appeared in the fog as a blurry white spot and did not give either warmth or shadow.
They chased each other with a squeak and dived into the foliage, as if into green water.
Like sparkling dust particles, small birds flew into this beam.
"No," answered the grandfather.
He lay on his side, panting and moving his fins.
I calculated that in the latter case we would go against the dangerous doorway, or, rather, we would be in sight of the people hiding in the doorway five times longer.
Later, when we recalled the incident in Sturdzovsky Lane, Yasha argued that always, if you want to do something in the best possible way, you will definitely break into a trifle.
The night was late, deaf, not a single star was overhead.
The river roared.
Then a dim fire flickered far into the sea and went out.
He reached the royal capital and found out that she had died perhaps she could not stand the separation.
Then she knelt down and dropped her head on the sand.
Light streams ran endlessly along the ceiling, light waves reflections of the river.
If there are people in the gateway, then they may not notice us.
Only occasionally did a single ray cut obliquely through the thicket and reveal to us the amazing power of vegetation.
I went ashore with Uncle Ilko.
He made us look at these things more closely and longer than we usually do, and discover in them many previously unnoticed qualities.
She saw from there how her father was carried out.
The sun could not break through the powerful green of this forest.
Yasha counted the seconds to himself.
At night, on the other side of the river, someone started waving a lantern and screaming.
Occasionally, out of the darkness, from the city, came the sound of gunshots.
I collected water from the pond into a bucket, threw grass into this water and waited.
And all the time someone was waving a lantern on the other side and shouting, but the words could not be made out over the noise of the river.
Under a single old sycamore with lemon spots on its trunk lay leaves that looked as if they had been carved from dull green velvet.
If we walk on the opposite side of the gateway, then we may be noticed from afar.
The calculation, in my opinion, was mathematically accurate.
It was impossible to make out what it was until the father dragged a heavy crucian onto the trampled grass.
Red floats stood motionless in the water.
As we passed near the gateway, Yasha stumbled.
We knew that it was a seven-minute walk from Sturdzovsky Lane to the Landesman sanatorium.
Amen!
We crept along the alley.
I, frozen, watched her angrily back away and get out of a tight flower.
She stood motionless on the shore.
I said that we should go along the side where the gateway is, before reaching it, stop, listen well, and then quickly and silently slip past the gateway.
He ran in long waves, then intensifying, then subsiding.
Ants ran in a file along the cast-iron gate, carrying the last stores for the winter into their underground granaries, and a small timid toad lived under the anchor chain.
The boundless sea noise did not stop for a minute.
I knew this from the smell of wet pebbles and the barely audible trembling of a lone sycamore leaf.
But he didn't leave, he was here.
I thought to myself that Yashin's unbearable gait was to blame.
Then he decided to go to Petersburg to see that woman, while he was not yet completely blind.
On the other bank, the reserved forest of Countess Branicka rose up the slope.
But I was silent so as not to upset Yasha.
And, therefore, there will be five times more chances that we will be noticed.
The wild freshness of the flood, the thawed earth, blew in my face.
When the coffin was carried out onto the porch, I saw on the other side of the river an old carriage, horses unharnessed and tied to it, and a little woman in black my mother.
The river roared right there, nearby.
In the morning I woke up from the hot sun beating on the white walls.
After each shot, the dogs barked for a long time.
I noticed this stubborn gray leaf during the day, but now, at night, it seemed to me a small living creature, my only waking friend.
The water flowed through the rowing like a cold waterfall.
That woman bequeathed to put a rose on her grave.
From his scales came an amazing smell of the underwater kingdom.
Ostap began to go blind.
That's right, we haven't seen each other.
Then one of them began to tremble, start up light circles, suddenly dive or swim quickly to the side.
The water ran up, shaking water lilies, water-meter beetles hurriedly fled in all directions, and finally, in the mysterious depth, a beating golden gleam appeared.
