I never thought that my mother would have the idea of remarrying.
Let me tell you, grandma has passed away, and now I live with my aunt.
Among the body parts scattered in the yard, there were a few more arms.
The most important event for me in that winter of 1993 was my father's return, the week before my mother's wedding.
That feeling sent chills down the back.
I went to the kitchen and turned off the stove.
I tried hard to recall, and the memory cards flipped in my mind.
Just now you said that everyone has a time to start luck, and life seems to be put on the reins suddenly.
This cousin is the eldest son of her family, and has always existed as a different kind in the whole family.
One afternoon in December, he came to see me at school.
I open my eyes.
We used hooks to pull them together to form a thousand-armed Avalokitesvara.
Since then, I have never had a home.
I just closed the door, feeling relieved, when the doorbell rang again.
"She never had a family" you ask.
You sit down awkwardly and watch me pour tea.
Perhaps subconsciously, I felt that she should suffer because of my dad's departure, just like me.
The water delivery boy was standing at the door with a bucket on his shoulders, saying that he was delivering water to a family in the western suburbs.
Our conversation was difficult.
He wore a dirty gray woolen hat and looked dazed.
"Ok."
You seem to be aware of it, but are still trying to find something to talk about.
I don't know why, I didn't even see his appearance clearly, but I felt that he seemed to be having a bad time.
You ask me if your appearance is different from what I imagined.
Half of the pot of water has evaporated, and the whole room is filled with white mist.
You stand at the door.
To me, everything about you is in the portfolio and sealed.
That autumn, my father left Jinan and went to Beijing alone.
The divorce of your parents has made you very depressed.
I haven't seen her for eighteen years, so it's not surprising that I don't recognize her.
The water on the stove was boiling and tumbling.
Then you said, you are Li Jiaqi.
Mine should be around eight years old.
My heart was sour, and tears fell out.
Every time I fall into silence, I feel that my heart is being oppressed, and I just want to end this meeting quickly.
It might hurt to say it, but I really don't look forward to seeing you again.
