I'd never imagined Mom would want to marry again.
I told you Granny was dead, but yes, I was still with Auntie.
There were now more dismembered arms among the body parts in the courtyard.
The most significant event of winter 1993, as far as I was concerned, was Dad's return—the week before Mom's marriage.
The thought chilled my spine.
I went to the kitchen and turned off the stove.
I frantically flicked through the Rolodex of my mind.
Earlier on, you said everyone has a moment when their fate is activated, and after that they're being led around by a rope.
This cousin of Dad's was her eldest son, and he didn't fit into our clan at all.
One afternoon in December, he showed up at my school and asked for me.
I opened my eyes.
We reached for them with a grappling hook, pulling them into the shape of a thousand-handed Goddess of Mercy.
From then on, I had no home.
I'd only just closed the door and sighed in relief when the bell rang again.
"And she never married?"
You sat and watched anxiously as I made tea.
Perhaps subconsciously, I wanted her to keep suffering from Dad's departure, just like I was.
Then someone tapped on the door: the water delivery boy.
It was a difficult conversation.
He wore a filthy gray wool hat and looked harried.
"No."
You seemed to sense this, and searched for something else to talk about.
Even before I could get a proper look at him, I had a feeling he wasn't doing well.
You asked if you looked how I'd imagined.
Half the water had boiled away, filling the room with fog.
You were in the doorway.
As far as I was concerned, you and everything to do with you had been placed into a sealed folder.
Dad left Jinan in the fall and traveled alone to Beijing.
You were feeling low because of your parents' divorce.
I hadn't seen you in eighteen years, no wonder I couldn't recognize you.
The boiling water rumbled.
You told me you were Li Jiaqi.
For me, that probably happened when I turned eight.
I felt a twinge in my heart, and tears came to my eyes.
Every time we fell into silence, I felt something squeezing at my heart, and I wanted to end this encounter as quickly as possible.
Maybe this is hurtful to hear, but I had truly never hoped to meet you again.
