Two other small photos with serrated edges, very likely taken the same year, show the same child, slimmer, in a flounced dress with puff sleeves.
In the first one, she nestles playfully against a stout woman, whose body is a solid mass in a wide-striped dress, her hair swept up in two big buns.
In the other photo, the child's left hand is raised, fist closed, the right one held back by the hand of a man.
He is tall with a light-colored jacket and pleated trousers, his bearing nonchalant.
Both photos were taken on the same day in a cobbled courtyard, in front of a low wall with a floral border along the top.
A clothesline hangs above their heads, a clothespin still hooked over it.
Another photo, stamped by the same photographer—the folder is of lesser quality, the gold border has disappeared—and probably destined for the same distribution within the family, shows a little girl of about four, serious, almost sad despite her nice plump face under short hair, parted down the middle and pulled back with barrettes to which little bow-ties are attached, like butterflies.
Her left hand rests on the same carved Louis XVI–style table, which is fully visible.
She bulges out of her bodice, her skirt with shoulder straps hiked up a little over a protuberant belly, possibly a sign of rickets (circa 1944).
Boys were proud to leave for their military service.
We thought they looked handsome in their uniforms.
On recruitment night, they made the rounds of the cafés to celebrate.
It brought them glory to be recognized as real men.
Before military service, they were still considered kids, devoid of status in the labor or marriage market.
Afterwards, they could have a wife and children.
The uniform they paraded through the neighborhood when they were on furlough lent them an aura of beauty and virtual sacrifice.
The shadow of the victorious veterans, the GIs, hovered over them.
The rough cloth of the jacket we brushed against as we stretched up to kiss them made tangible the absolute division between the worlds of men and women.
When we looked at them we had a sense of heroism.
Beneath the surface of the things that never changed, last year's circus posters with the photo of Roger Lanzac, First Communion photos handed out to schoolmates, the Club des chansonniers on Radio Luxembourg, our days swelled with new desires.
On Sunday afternoons, we crowded around the windows of the general electrics shop to watch television.
Cafés invested in TV sets to lure clientele.
Motocross trails wound up and down the hills, and we watched the deafening machines race all day.
Commerce grew increasingly impatient and galvanized the daily routine of towns and cities with new watchwords such as "initiative" and "dynamism."
The two-week trade fair became a fixture among the more traditional rites of spring, the funfair and the church bazaar.
Loudspeakers bellowed sales pitches through the streets of the town center, interspersed with songs by Annie Cordy and Eddie Constantine.
Buy, we were urged, to get a chance to win a Simca or a dining room suite.
From the podium in front of the town hall, a local presenter entertained the crowd with the jokes of Roger Nicolas and Jean Richard, and rounded up candidates for quiz shows, The Hook or Double or Nothing, as on the radio.
From a corner of the podium, the Queen of Commerce ruled from beneath her crown.
The world of merchandise took advantage of the holiday to stake its claim.
People said, "Gets you out of the house," and "It's a nice change, you don't want be an old stick-in-the-mud."
But they only spoke of what they had seen and could re-live while eating and drinking.
They lacked the talent and conviction to speak of things they'd been aware of but had not seen.
Therefore, no Jewish children boarding trains for Auschwitz, nor bodies of starvation victims collected every morning from the Warsaw Ghetto, nor Hiroshima's 10,000 degrees.
Whence our impression, which later history courses, documentaries, and films failed to dispel, that neither the crematoria nor the atomic bomb belonged to the same timeline as black market butter, air-raid warnings, and descents to the cellar.
They started to make comparisons with the other war, 1914, the Great War, won in blood and glory, a man's war, and around the table the women listened to the men with respect.
They spoke of Chemin des Dames and Verdun, the gassed soldiers, the bells of November 11, 1918.
They named villages whose children left for the Front, never to return, not one.
They compared the soldiers in the mud-filled trenches with the prisoners of 1940, warm and sheltered for five years without a bomb ever landing on them.
They quarreled over who had been more heroic and who more unlucky.
The children didn't listen.
They rushed from the table the moment they were excused and took advantage of the holiday goodwill to play forbidden games, jumping on beds, swinging upside down.
But they remembered every detail.
Next to that wondrous time, the episodes whose order they would not retain for years, the Rout, the Occupation, the Exodus, the Landing, the Victory, the nameless time in which they grew seemed colorless.
They regretted they had not been born (or were only infants) in the days when people were forced to take to the roads in bands and sleep on straw like gypsies.
Not having lived this way would stamp them with a lasting sorrow.
They were saddled with other people's memories and a secret nostalgia for the time they'd missed by so little, along with the hope of living it one day.
The frenzy that had followed Liberation was fading.
All that people thought about was going out, and the world was full of desires that clamored for immediate satisfaction.
Anything that comprised a first time since the war provoked a stampede—bananas, fireworks, National Lottery tickets.
Entire neighborhoods, from elderly ladies propped up by their daughters to infants in strollers, flocked to the funfair, the torchlight tattoo, and the Bouglione circus, where they narrowly escaped being crushed in the melee.
They took to the road in praying, singing crowds to welcome the statue of Our Lady of Boulogne and walk her back the following day over many kilometers.
They never missed a chance, secular or religious, to be outside with other people, as if they still yearned to live in a group.
On Sunday evenings, the coaches returned from the seaside with tall youths in shorts clinging to the luggage roofs and singing at the top of their voices.
Dogs roamed free and mated in the middle of the streets.
Family narrative and social narrative are one and the same.
The voices around the table mapped out the territories of youth: countrysides and farms where, for time immemorial, men had been hired hands and girls housemaids; the factory where they all had met, stepped out together, and married, the small businesses to which the most ambitious had risen.
They told stories that contained no personal detail except for births, weddings, and funerals, no travel except to regiments in distant garrison towns, existences entirely filled by work, its harsh conditions, the perils of drink.
School was a mythical backdrop, a brief golden age with the schoolmaster as its rough god, equipped with an iron ruler for the rapping of knuckles.
Darkened photos passed from hand to hand, the backs soiled by all the other fingers that had handled them at other meals, coffee and fat dissolved into an indefinable hue.
No one recognized their parents—or anyone, come to that—in the stiff and somber newlyweds, the wedding guests in tiered rows along a wall.
Nor did one see oneself in the half-naked baby of indistinct sex, who sat on a cushion, an alien creature from a mute and inaccessible time
