Miho and Satsuki have a similar facial expression and way of speaking, probably because they meet frequently in their hometowns.
The way they eat sweets is particularly similar, and both of them are carrying cookies to their mouths while breaking them into small pieces with their manicured hands.
I try to remember if it was like that before, but my memory is vague.
I think that the small habits and gestures of the two of them when they met before may have already flowed out somewhere.
Miho is now married and has bought a second-hand detached house in her hometown, where her friends often gather.
Tomorrow is also a part-time job, so there are times when I think it's a hassle, but it's the only point of contact with the world other than convenience stores, and it's a valuable opportunity to interact with "normal women in their thirties" of the same age, so I try to accept Miho's invitation as much as possible.
I have to.
Today, Miho, Yukari who still has a small child, Satsuki and I, who are married but have no children, brought a cake to Miho's house for tea.
Then, for the first time, I could become a part of the world.
I thought I was born now.
I was certainly born on this day as a normal part of the world.
For the two weeks leading up to the opening, we practiced in duo, working with employees, and facing imaginary customers.
Look the customer in the eye, smile and bow, put sanitary napkins in a paper bag, keep warm items separate from cold items, and disinfect your hands with alcohol when asked for fast food.
There was real money in the cash register to help me get used to money, but the receipt had "Training" printed in large letters, and the person I was working with was a part-time worker wearing the same uniform, so I somehow pretended to be shopping.
Seemed to be Unlike me, my sister, who is two years younger than me, was a "normal" child, but she didn't shy away from me.
When my sister was being scolded by my mother for normal things, I approached her and asked her why she was angry.
After the sermon ended because I asked my mother a question, my sister always said "thank you" to me, probably because she thought she was being protected.
I was not very interested in sweets and toys, so I often gave them to my sister.
Therefore, my sister was always following me around.
"Dad, I love yakitori, so let's grill and eat this today."
I wondered if I hadn't heard it well, so I repeated it with a clear pronunciation, and my mother was startled.
I almost laughed because of his funny face, but when I saw him staring at my hands, I thought, well, one bird isn't enough.
"Should I get more?"
When I glanced at two or three sparrows walking side-by-side nearby, my mother finally came to her senses and screamed desperately in a reproachful voice, "Keiko!"
"Mr. Kotori, let's make a grave and bury it.
Look, everyone is crying.
It's sad that your friend died.
Hey, don't you feel sorry for me?"
"Why?"
My mother was at a loss for words at my question.
I quickly put the canned coffee, cigarettes, and American dog into an S size bag.
In the meantime, the man who was ringing the coins in his pocket suddenly put his hand in his breast pocket.
From that gesture, I immediately decided that the payment was made with electronic money.
"Welcome, good morning!"
I gave a light nod and received the canned coffee that the male customer offered me.
"Ah, and one cigarette No. 5"
"Understood"
Quickly pull out the Marlboro Light Menthol and scan it at the cash register.
"Please touch to confirm your age."
While touching the screen, the man's gaze suddenly shifted to the showcase lined with fast food, and I stopped moving my finger.
I could say, "Would you like some bait?"
In response to the faint sound of coins, I turn around and look at the cash register.
Many people who crunch coins in their palms or pockets are trying to quickly buy cigarettes or newspapers and go home, so they are sensitive to the sound of money.
Sure enough, there was a man approaching the register with a can of coffee in one hand and the other in his pocket.
I quickly move around the store, slide my body into the cashier counter, and stand inside to wait so as not to keep the customer waiting.
Convenience stores are full of sounds.
To the sound of the chimes of customers entering the store, the voices of idols promoting new products through cable broadcasts that flow through the store.
The clerk's shout and the sound of scanning a barcode.
The sound of putting things in a basket, the sound of a bread bag being squeezed, and the sound of heels walking around the store.
Everything mixes together and becomes the "convenience store sound" that touches my eardrums all the time.
