When I was little, after each story I would take hold of her wrist, lay my thumb on her pulse, and imagine that the whole world followed the rhythm of Selma's heartbeat.
She placed a slice of cheese on the bread, put the other piece of bread on top, and slipped it in my lunch box.
Selma was still standing in front of the kitchen bench.
The train ride lasted fifteen minutes, there were no intermediate stops.
That morning, a few hours after Selma's dream, everyone moved through the village as if black ice had formed beneath their feet, not only outside, but inside their homes as well, black ice in their kitchens and living rooms.
All day long, they eyed their lives suspiciously and, as far as possible, the lives of others as well.
Coffeepots and shoelaces, for example, or deposit bottles and fir trees.
They looked up to rule out falling roof tiles, branches, or heavy light fixtures.
In first grade, I had listed for Martin everything I saw during the ride and he tried to learn it all by heart.
"Do you know exactly when you had the dream?"
She looked at the dog for a long time.
"Yes, you can," I said, and suggested that it might have been a misshapen cow, a badly assembled giraffe, a freak of nature, and besides, the stripes and reddish color are hard to see at night.
She spread butter on a piece of bread, and because she was still sashaying around, her wrist knocked the cheese off the counter.
Then she looked at my father as if he were a gift shop.
That's how the mind works.
This had always reliably put me to sleep, but now that I was ten years old, Selma felt I was too old for it.
They moved as if their own bodies suddenly felt foreign to them, as if all their joints were inflamed and all the objects they handled were highly flammable.
I pictured the optician grinding lenses, Martin lifting a heavy weight, Elsbeth trimming her hedges, the shopkeeper stacking cartons of juice, my mother layering fir branches, my father writing out prescriptions, all exactly to the beat of Selma's heart.
It was true.
"Of course," Farmer Häubel would say, "please come in," and Death would enter.
On such days anything was possible, a senile dachshund could bite clean through one's throat, something which, in the end, was no more incongruous than an okapi.
"Around three," Selma said.
Three o'clock.
He pictured Death knocking softly, opening the door just a crack, and asking, "May I?" to which Farmer Häubel would naturally answer in the affirmative.
It can draw connections between completely unrelated things in an instant.
They were not frightened when owls hooted, when a horse in the stall broke into a heavy sweat, when a dog howled in the night with its head lowered.
"We probably shouldn't take it too seriously," Selma said, but like a TV detective who is not taking an anonymous letter too seriously.
Selma stopped moving and looked down at the package of cheese as if it were something valuable that had smashed into a thousand pieces.
They kept looking around to check if someone filled with bloodlust were about to pounce—someone who had lost his reason and had nothing much to lose—and then they quickly looked straight ahead again because anyone who was out of his mind could very well attack from the front.
Except for Selma's sister-in-law Elsbeth, people in the village were for the most part not superstitious.
He was sure that Death would not wrench life away from him but would remove it gently.
It worked so well that by second grade I no longer had to list anything, and Martin, with his back to the window and his eyes closed, could recite almost everything I was seeing through the foggy window: "Wire factory," he would say at the very moment we passed the wire factory.
"What will it be for your snack at school today?" she warbled.
Farmer Häubel was sure that Death would be polite, just as he had been himself for his entire life.
He would apologize in advance for his cold hands, which Farmer Häubel knew would not bother him at all, and then Death would lay a hand on Farmer Häubel's eyes.
"My little mouse," she added, and now the warbling and the little mouse were truly alarming.
The villagers were unsettled, you could tell, even though most of them tried not to let anything show.
Its body was still small, but its paws were as big as a bear's, and we all knew what that meant.
He was entirely correct but had unfortunately revealed more to the voices than he should have.
"Cowardice," the optician said, and shifted the leather bag to his other hip because the bumping of the bag and the jostling of the voices had started to hurt.
Whenever I slept downstairs at Selma's she would tell me bedtime stories with happy endings.
