They flopped, blasting their old-time music.
"Is that a Persian rug?"
The one with the big ass?
Later the talk grew louder.
We heard them from behind the cracked panes of the dilapidated greenhouse or on the cool black water of the lake, where we floated in our underwear at midnight.
Move in a natural manner toward this figment of my imagination, making a purposeful face.
"Admit it, that was your mother," said a kid named Rafe to a kid named Sukey, when the parents had filed out.
"So fuck you."
We put the dogs in a play and invited the parents, since there was no one else to be an audience.
We had to hide the running, though, in case our haste betrayed us, so truer to say we slipped out quietly.
There were merits and demerits.
We had a system of accounting, a chart on a wall.
We'd paddle across the lake, over a marsh, down a stream, and come to the river's mouth.
No one would cop to it, of course.
A merit was for an outrage success­fully committed, a demerit for an act that should bring on humiliation.
We liked to have an impact.
We watched her apply it, unaware.
"Oh, poor old thing, she has a nervous bladder!" exclaimed someone's chubby mother.
As the evenings wore on, some parents got it into their heads to dance.
Or the one with the clubfoot?"
But the pets were poorly trained and failed to take direction.
Juicy got merits for drooling into cocktails undetected, while Low got demerits for kissing up to a father.
The soldiers were cowards.
That was satisfying.
"Beat on the brat, beat on the brat, beat on the brat with a baseball bat, oh yeah."
The mother was speaking from the breakfast room, out of my field of view.
THE GREAT HOUSE had been built by robber barons in the nineteenth century, a palatial retreat for the green months.
Where the water met the sky.
I liked that room a lot, with its long, oaken table and glass walls on three sides.
We'd run along the beach on a salt breeze, leaving our boats on the sand.
Drained.
"Neither," said Sukey.
But he'd been spotted asking a guy with male-pattern baldness for wardrobe advice.
Even the smallest canoe could take us down to the ocean.
Deserters, basically.
Probably not his own—Low's parentage was a well-kept secret.
We canceled the performance.
One dog got makeup applied to its face, lipstick and blue eye shadow.
Sad spectacle.
You could see the bright sparkle of the lake through the glass walls, and sunlight shifted through the moving branches of an ancient willow that shaded the house.
A flash of life would move their lumpen bodies.
When we were done, the lipstick went back into some mother's Fendi handbag.
The lady urinated.
When one of my parents appeared, my technique was: pretend to catch sight of someone in the next room.
It was a white-faced dog, so the makeup showed up well.
There were two soldiers and a fancy lady we'd dressed in a frilly padded bra.
