Unlike me she was always being told off for silly little things, and whenever this happened I would go up to mother and ask her why she was so angry.
The little habits and gestures they had last time I met them must have already been flushed out of my mind I thought to myself.
A convenience store is a world of sound.
I couldn't help wondering whether they had always been like that, but my memory was hazy.
"Shall I get some more?"
I quickly move through the store, slide behind the counter, and stand at the ready so as not to keep him waiting.
"Irasshaimasé! Good morning, sir."
I put the can of coffee, cigarettes, and corn dog into a small-size bag.
I bow and take the can of coffee he holds out to me.
I could ask him whether he'd like anything else, but when a customer appears to be dithering over whether or not to buy something, I make a point of taking a step back and waiting.
Instantly I deduce that he will use electronic money.
At that moment, for the first time ever, I felt I'd become a part in the machine of society.
After Miho married, she and her husband bought a secondhand house where she now often holds little parties with her friends.
And yes: as I'd thought, a man with a can of coffee in one hand, the other hand in his pocket, is approaching the till.
That day, I actually became a normal cog in society.
Alerted by a faint clink of coins I turn and look over at the cash register.
Miho and Satsuki wear exactly the same expression and speak the same way, perhaps because they live close to each other and often meet up.
It's a sound I'm sensitive to, since customers who come just to buy cigarettes or a newspaper often jingle coins in their hand or pocket.
This generally put an end to the lecture, and my sister always thanked me for it as if she thought I were protecting her.
Until then the man had been jingling the coins in his pocket, but now he suddenly moves his hand to his breast pocket as though something has just occurred to him.
The way they eat cookies is especially similar, both breaking off tiny pieces and putting them in their mouths with hands that have perfectly manicured nails.
For the two weeks prior to opening, we worked in pairs to role-play dealing with imaginary customers.
"Please confirm your age on the touch screen."
We practiced looking the customer in the eye, smiling and bowing, cleaning our hands with alcohol before handling items from the hot-food cabinet, putting hot and cold items into separate bags, and sanitary products into paper bags.
