He gets out of his seat and vigorously crosses himself—once, twice, and then again.
Many years later, under unknown circumstances, it made its way to Berlin, where it underwent detailed measurement and research and was labeled a prime example of Jewish racial inferiority.
They had been in Ivanie since April.
And yet!
All the Offenbach neophytes were buried in the city cemetery, though some years later this cemetery began to interfere with plans to expand the town, and it was ultimately liquidated in 1866.
And indeed, from somewhere off to the left, through the billows of fog, the faint murmur of water reaches their ears.
Many stalls here sell beer, and the better shops also keep vodka, and mead—mostly trójniak.
"I don't know where to go," he says.
Soon Father Chmielowski relaxes back inside his carriage, stretching his legs out before him, allowing his eyes to drift within this mass of fog.
The woman gathers them back up in embarrassment, as if she had suddenly bared her most inaccessible secrets to the eyes of the world.
She lurches, yanking the drawbar, and were it not for Roshko's firm hand and whip, she would have overturned the britchka.
To him, to Yeruhim, I also confessed about Hayah Shorr—that she was the one woman I was ever able to love, and that I had loved her from that beautiful moment when I was given her for one night, back when I had come with news of Jacob to Rohatyn.
Were it not for those good Ivanie people, they probably would have starved to death.
His shirt pokes out from underneath his faded red Sunday doublet.
Right away he slips into his musings—for man thinks best in motion.
The bundle she had on her back falls down, and a few faded rags and a single string of beads, small and dimmed, tumble out of it onto the ground.
After all, the Jewish historian Josephus maintains the world was created in the autumn, at the autumn equinox.
Jacob Frank's skull was removed from his grave, and, thoughtfully recorded as "a skull belonging to a Jewish patriarch," it passed into the hands of the historian of the city of Offenbach.
Franciszek, born in 1786 in Brünn and raised in Offenbach, became one of the best lawyers and scholars of law of his era.
They will receive a piece of land, Beyla will have vegetables in her garden, and he, Srol, will weave carpets, because he knows how to do that and is good at it.
"Quiet!" the priest says suddenly, and raises his finger, straining to hear.
Of the Wołowski family there is the most to say, for it grew until it attained gargantuan proportions.
When they come to the main road leading to Rohatyn, they join the stream of persons on foot and horseback and in every variety of vehicle who appear out of the fog like Christmas figurines sculpted from bread.
Nearly all its branches became ennobled, some under the Bawół coat of arms, others under Na Kaskach.
Peasants lead goats and cows to be sold; the animals, frightened by the tumult, stop among the puddles and refuse to budge.
Ivanie saved their lives and health, Beyla feels better now, and isn't coughing quite as much.
In their old age, once they have married off their daughters, the girls will take them in.
That is his whole dream.
After the Second World War, it vanished without a trace—either it was destroyed in the turmoil and chaos of war, crumbling to dust, or else it is still lying around somewhere in the underground storage facility of some museum.
She squats down beside the boy, grabs him by the wrists, and he looks her straight in the eye, still smiling, that little rascal.
There is a logic to it.
She responds automatically, but solemnly, too: "Forever and ever, amen."
Srol believes that once they have been baptized, they will be as well off as the Christians.
Interestingly, when a proposal came before the Sejm to grant Polish citizenship to Jews, Franciszek, as a member of parliament, vehemently argued that it was not yet time to take such a step.
Suddenly, without warning, the first buildings appear in front of them.
He leans forward and peers into the fog as he would into water.
She looks at a family of girls, a woman with a child at her breast just climbing down awkwardly from her cart, the driver chasing her off because he has to take the cart back right away to pick up others on the outskirts of town.
First the Polish nation had to win its independence; only then they would be able to turn to such social reforms.
After Jacob's death, I entered into a period of peace.
My main occupation became studying Merkavah, which my conversations with Yeruhim Dembowski also managed to cover, as we lived in the one room, which meant we got closer to each other.
"Kaśka won't go, good sir," Roshko grumbles when the carriage comes to a stop.
It'll be just about to chime.
And her hand flies up to her heart, and her eyes fill with tears.
The Jewish merchant Wachshul, meanwhile, sells wine, real Hungarian and Rhineland wine, as well as some sourer stuff they bring in from Wallachia.
On the outskirts of Rohatyn, in Babińce, are several small breweries that give the whole region this satiating scent.
Did not the world emerge from such a fog? he starts to wonder.
But above all, of course, it was Jacob I had loved.
The bones of those buried there were carefully collected and respectfully reburied elsewhere.
Evidently the fog changes all perception of distance, as even Kaśka seems confused.
