Two other small jagged-edged photos, presumably from the same year, show the same child, but smaller, in a ruffled dress with balloon sleeves. In the first, she playfully snuggles up to a massively bodied, one-piece woman in a wide-striped dress, her hair up in big rolls. On the other, she raises her left fist, the right is held by the hand of a man, tall, in a light jacket and pleated trousers, with a nonchalant posture. The two photos were taken the same day in front of a low wall surmounted by a border of flowers, in a paved courtyard. Above the heads passes a clothesline on which a pin has remained hung.
Another photo, signed by the same photographer but the paper of the booklet is more ordinary and the gold border has disappeared -, undoubtedly dedicated to the same family distribution, shows a little girl of about four years old, serious, almost sad despite a nice plump face under short hair, separated by a parting in the middle and pulled back by bars to which are attached ribbons, like butterflies. The left hand rests on the same sculpted table, entirely visible, in the Louis XVI style. She appears pudgy in her bodice, her suspender skirt goes up in front because of a protruding belly, perhaps a sign of rickets (1944, circa).
The boys were proud to go to the regiment and they were thought to be handsome as soldiers. On the night of the review board, they made the rounds of cafes to celebrate the glory of being recognized as real men. Before the regiment, they were still kids and were worthless on the job and marriage market. Afterwards, they could have a wife and children. The uniform they paraded around the neighborhood on leave enveloped them in patriotic beauty and virtual sacrifice. The shadow of the victorious fighters, of the GIs, floated around them. The rough sheet of the smock, brushed when you stood on tiptoe to kiss them, materialized the absolute cut between the world of men and that of women. Seeing them one felt a sense of heroism.
Beneath the immutability, last year's circus posters with the photo of Roger Lanzac, the pictures of first communion distributed to comrades, the Chansonniers Club on Radio Luxembourg, the days were filled with new desires. On Sunday afternoons, we gathered in the window of the general electricity store in front of the television. Cafes invested in the purchase of a station to attract customers. Along the hillsides snaked motocross tracks and we watched the deafening machines go up and down the whole day. The growing impatience of commerce with its new watchwords, "initiative", "dynamism", shook the routine of the cities. Between the carnival and the fair, the Commercial Fortnight was established as a spring rite. In the streets of the center, the loudspeakers bellowed incitements to buy, interspersed with songs of Annie Cordy and Eddie Constantine, to win the Simca or the dining room. On the podium, Place de la Mairie, a local host made laughs with the jokes of Roger Nicolas and Jean Richard, rounded up candidates for Crochet or Quitte ou double, as on the radio. Seated in a corner of the podium was enthroned under her crown the Queen of Commerce. The merchandise moved forward under the colors of the party. People said "it's a change" or "we mustn't get stuck, we're stupid to stay at home".
But they spoke only of what they had seen, which could be relived by eating and drinking. They didn't have enough talent or conviction to talk about what they knew but hadn't seen. So neither Jewish children boarding trains for Auschwitz, nor dead of starvation picked up in the morning in the Warsaw ghetto, nor 10,000 degrees in Hiroshima. Hence this impression that later history lessons, documentaries and films would not dissipate: neither the crematory ovens nor the atomic bomb were situated in the same era as butter on the black market, scares and the descents to the cellar.
By comparison, they were gearing up to the war before, the Great, that of 14, won, it, in blood and glory, a war of men that the women at the table listened to with respect. They spoke of the Chemin des Dames and Verdun, of the gassed, of the bells of November 11, 1918. They named villages from which not a child who had gone to the front had returned. They pitted the soldiers in the mud of the trenches against the prisoners of 40, warm and sheltered for five years, who had not even received bombs on the head. They fought over heroism and misfortune.
The children did not listen and rushed to leave the table as soon as they received permission, taking advantage of the general goodwill of the holidays to indulge in forbidden games, jumping on the beds and swinging their heads. down. But they held everything back. Next to the fabulous time whose episodes they would not order for a long time, the Debacle, the Exodus, the Occupation, the Landing, the Victory they found dull the nameless one in which they grew up. They regretted not having been born, or barely, when they had to set off in cohorts on the roads and sleep on the straw like bohemians. Of this unlived time they would keep the tenacious regret. The memories of others gave them a secret nostalgia for this time they had missed so little and the hope of living it one day.
The frenzy that had followed the Liberation was fading. So people thought only of going out and the world was full of desires to be satisfied on the spot. Everything that constituted the first time since the war caused the rush, the bananas, the National Lottery tickets, the fireworks. Whole quarters, from the grandmother supported by her daughters to the infant in a pram, people rushed to the carnival, to the torchlight procession, to the Bouglione circus where they were almost trampled in the rush. They went in a praying and singing crowd on the road to welcome the statue of Notre-Dame de Boulogne and to drive it back the next day for miles. Secular or religious, any opportunity was good for them to be outside together, as if they wanted to continue to live collectively. On Sunday evening, the coaches returned from the sea with tall young men in shorts, singing at the top of their voices, climbing onto the luggage roof. The dogs roamed free and mated in the middle of the street.
Family story and social story are all one. The voices of the guests delimited the spaces of youth: the countryside and the farms where, from lost memory, the men had been clerks and the girls servants, the factory where all had met, frequented and married, the small shops where the most ambitious had acceded. They drew stories without personal events other than births, marriages and bereavements, without trips outside the regiment to a distant garrison town, of lives filled with work, its hardness and wear and tear, the threats of drink. The school was a mythical background, a brief golden age of which the Teacher had been the rough god with his iron ruler to tap on the fingers.
From hand to hand passed browned photos with their backs stained by every finger that had held them in other meals, a mixture of coffee and grease melted into an indefinable color. In the stiff and serious newlyweds, the wedding guests staggered in several rows along a wall, neither his parents nor anyone else could be recognized. It was not oneself either that one saw in the baby of indistinct sex half-naked on a cushion but someone else, a creature belonging to a mute and inaccessible time.
