The boundless sea noise did not stop for a minute. He ran in long waves, then intensifying, then subsiding. And the wind either began to rustle in the bare trees, then fell silent, just as I listened to the flow of the night. But he didn't leave, he was here. I knew this from the smell of wet pebbles and the barely audible trembling of a lone sycamore leaf. I noticed this stubborn gray leaf during the day, but now, at night, it seemed to me a small living creature, my only waking friend. Occasionally, out of the darkness, from the city, came the sound of gunshots. After each shot, the dogs barked for a long time. Then a dim fire flickered far into the sea and went out.
He made us look at these things more closely and longer than we usually do, and discover in them many previously unnoticed qualities. So, in the porous yellow stone there were many small sea shells firmly soldered into it, a few more flowers remained on the gorse bushes, they sat on straight hard stems, like wet and shriveled golden butterflies, and patiently waited for the sun. But it very rarely appeared in the fog as a blurry white spot and did not give either warmth or shadow. Under a single old sycamore with lemon spots on its trunk lay leaves that looked as if they had been carved from dull green velvet. Ants ran in a file along the cast-iron gate, carrying the last stores for the winter into their underground granaries, and a small timid toad lived under the anchor chain.
At night, on the other side of the river, someone started waving a lantern and screaming. I went ashore with Uncle Ilko. The river roared. The water flowed through the rowing like a cold waterfall. The night was late, deaf, not a single star was overhead. The wild freshness of the flood, the thawed earth, blew in my face. And all the time someone was waving a lantern on the other side and shouting, but the words could not be made out over the noise of the river.
When the coffin was carried out onto the porch, I saw on the other side of the river an old carriage, horses unharnessed and tied to it, and a little woman in black my mother. She stood motionless on the shore. She saw from there how her father was carried out. Then she knelt down and dropped her head on the sand.
"No," answered the grandfather. That's right, we haven't seen each other. Ostap began to go blind. Then he decided to go to Petersburg to see that woman, while he was not yet completely blind. He reached the royal capital and found out that she had died perhaps she could not stand the separation. Ostap found her grave made of white marble-stone in the cemetery, looked, and his heart broke his iron rose lay on the stone. That woman bequeathed to put a rose on her grave. Forever. And Ostap began to liar and, maybe, he died on the highway or in the market under a cart. Amen!
On the other bank, the reserved forest of Countess Branicka rose up the slope. The sun could not break through the powerful green of this forest. Only occasionally did a single ray cut obliquely through the thicket and reveal to us the amazing power of vegetation. Like sparkling dust particles, small birds flew into this beam. They chased each other with a squeak and dived into the foliage, as if into green water.
I collected water from the pond into a bucket, threw grass into this water and waited. Red floats stood motionless in the water. Then one of them began to tremble, start up light circles, suddenly dive or swim quickly to the side. Father hooked, the line was stretched, the walnut rod was bent into an arc, and gurgling, splashing, fussing began in the fog over the pond. The water ran up, shaking water lilies, water-meter beetles hurriedly fled in all directions, and finally, in the mysterious depth, a beating golden gleam appeared. It was impossible to make out what it was until the father dragged a heavy crucian onto the trampled grass. He lay on his side, panting and moving his fins. From his scales came an amazing smell of the underwater kingdom.
Yasha counted the seconds to himself. We knew that it was a seven-minute walk from Sturdzovsky Lane to the Landesman sanatorium. In the sanatorium behind a high fence and iron gates, we always felt completely safe. Especially if they didn't light oil lamps. As we passed near the gateway, Yasha stumbled. Later, when we recalled the incident in Sturdzovsky Lane, Yasha argued that always, if you want to do something in the best possible way, you will definitely break into a trifle. I thought to myself that Yashin's unbearable gait was to blame. But I was silent so as not to upset Yasha.
We crept along the alley. I said that we should go along the side where the gateway is, before reaching it, stop, listen well, and then quickly and silently slip past the gateway. The calculation, in my opinion, was mathematically accurate. If there are people in the gateway, then they may not notice us. If we walk on the opposite side of the gateway, then we may be noticed from afar. I calculated that in the latter case we would go against the dangerous doorway, or, rather, we would be in sight of the people hiding in the doorway five times longer. And, therefore, there will be five times more chances that we will be noticed.
In the morning I woke up from the hot sun beating on the white walls. Red and yellow mallow nuns swayed outside the open window. Together with them, a nasturtium flower peered into the room; a furry bee sat in it. I, frozen, watched her angrily back away and get out of a tight flower. Light streams ran endlessly along the ceiling, light waves reflections of the river. The river roared right there, nearby.
